The Arrhenius theory of acids and bases defines
an acid as a substance that releases H+ ions
in solution, and a base as a substance that
releases OH- ions in solution.
We know that ammonia, NH3, can act as a base
and exhibits alkaline properties, but contains
no OH- ions. How is this possible?
In this lesson, we will learn about the Bronsted-Lowry
theory of acids and bases, which fills in
the gaps in the Arrhenius theory.
Knowledge Core
You have learned that acids are substances
with a pH lower than 7.
We can test for acids using universal indicator
solution or paper, which turns red or orange,
all depending on the strength of the acid.
Blue litmus paper also turns red in the presence
of an acid.
An example of an acid that you are likely
familiar with is hydrochloric acid.
Hydrogen chloride dissolves in water to give
hydrochloric acid.
Hydrogen chloride will dissociate to give
a H+ ion and a Cl- ion.
HCl --> H+ and Cl-
The H+ ion is not just 'released', but it
is transferred to another substance.
HCl(g) + H2O(l) --> H3O+(aq) + Cl-(aq)
For our example, water accepts the H+ ion
to form a hydronium ion, H3O+.
It is also known as an oxonium ion.
A Bronsted-Lowry acid is a substance that
releases or donates H+ ions in solution, in
our case, HCl.
A Bronsted-Lowry base is a substance that
accepts H+ ions in solution, in our case,
H2O.
Notice that the definition of a Bronsted-Lowry
acid or base is not a function of pH.
So an acid-base reaction, according to the
Bronsted-Lowry theory, involves the transfer
of a H+ ion from one substance to another.
In the introduction, we mentioned that ammonia
acts as a base even though it does not release
OH- ions, which is stipulated in the Arrhenius
theory.
When ammonia dissolves in water, it accepts
a H+ ion from water.
NH3(g) + H2O(l) --> NH4+(aq) + OH-(aq)
Notice that this reaction also involves a
H+ ion transfer.
Can you figure out which substance is acting
as an acid in this example? Which is acting
as a base?
Please pause the lesson to think about this,
and resume when you are ready.
In this example, water acts as a Bronsted-Lowry
acid because it releases a H+ ion.
Ammonia acts as a Bronsted-Lowry base because
it accepts a H+ ion.
A base, according to the Bronsted-Lowry theory,
does not need to have a pH greater than 7
or turn red litmus paper blue, or turn universal
indicator solution or paper blue or purple.
The only requirement is that it is able to
accept H+ ions.
Have you noticed that H2O acted as a base
in our first example but as an acid in the
second example?
Substances that can act as either an acid
or a base are amphoteric.
An easy way to remember this term is to recall
that frogs are amphibians Ã they live on
land and water.
Final Summary
In conclusion, according to the Bronsted-Lowry
theory, an acid is a substance that dissociates
to release or donate H+ ions.
A Bronsted-Lowry base is a substance that
accepts H+ ions.
Therefore, an acid-base reaction, according
to this theory, involves the transfer of a
proton.